1. Run manual_select_contour.m to manually trace cell outlines.Select the 3D image to segment ('myxoFirstFrame_T1.tif' is an example data.).Then, a GUI will pop up to set up parameters for tracing cell outlines. 'x skip' means the gap between 2D slice of the 3D image in x dimension for tracing cell contours.'x0' means the start 2D slice in x dimension. 'x_end' means the end 2D slice in x dimension. If 'x_end' is 0, this dimension will be ignored when tracing cell contours.'y_skip', 'y0', 'y_end', 'z_skip', 'z0' and 'z_end' are defined in the same way.	The output of this step are three files: x_frames, y_frames and z_frames. They contains all manually traced cell outlines.2. Manually load three files from step 1: x_frames, y_frames and z_frames, then run assign_contour2cells_v2.m to group 2D cell contours to single cells	This step will call the function to extract clusters from adjecent matrix. The code is referred from the following link.Raphaël Candelier (2020). Adjacency matrix to clusters (https://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/60676-adjacency-matrix-to-clusters), MATLAB Central File Exchange. Retrieved May 22, 2020.	The output of this step is 'adjacent_results.mat' which contains all grouped contours.Run convertCell2Mat.m to save each contour group separately.Run plotCheckGroupedContours.m to check each contour group.3. For bad contour groups, run Clustering_1st.m to manually segment cells from them.This step will call the function DBSCAN.m to group points. The code is referred from the following link.Yarpiz (2020). DBSCAN Clustering Algorithm (https://www.mathworks.com/matlabcentral/fileexchange/52905-dbscan-clustering-algorithm), MATLAB Central File Exchange. Retrieved May 22, 2020.4. For each segmented cell, run removeBadData.m to check and remove bad contours.5. Run combineDataSets.m to combine all segmented cells to one data set. ‘GT_myxo_firstFrame_nofitting_20200306.tif’ is the final annotated results.